How to Encourage Seniors with Eating Problems to Eat More
For Seniors with Poor Appetite
In older people, loss of appetite can often point to a major illness.
The first thing to do when the senior stops eating or shows a decline in interest in food is to find the cause.
Treating the underlying cause can often help a person regain some appetite.
Bringing the senior to a doctor to get to the bottom of the issue and find the cause
is a good first step.
While treating the underlying cause of the appetite problem,
there are things one can do to encourage the senior to eat or to stimulate their appetite.
Evaluate the Environment
First, assess the environment and layout of the area where the senior eats.
If there’s a lot of noise in the room or if the light is too dim,
it can make it difficult for the senior to focus on eating.
This is particularly true for person with dementia.
Create an inviting atmosphere for meals.
Turn off the radio or TV.
If the senior is living in residential home,
see if it is possible for him or her to eat in the room,
rather than in a crowded, busy dining area.
If the eating area is dark, open the curtains or turn on a light.
In some cases, a room that’s too bright or that has sharp, glaring lamps
can make it difficult for a person to eat.
Change the position of lights if they are shining in a person’s eyes or directly on the table.
Choose the Food with Care
Getting the senior to eat is about offering quality, not quantity.
It is better to offer nutrient-rich, healthy choices
than to provide high calorie, high-fat junk food.
Often, serving smaller meals more frequently can help a senior regain his or her appetite.
Limiting the choices available can also help resolve a loss of appetite in elderly people.
When there’s too much available, it’s easy for a person, especially someone with cognitive decline,
to become overwhelmed by it all.
Along with providing the seniors with the right food,
be sure to make water available at all meals and throughout the day.
People are less likely to eat when they feel dehydrated,
and older adults often have difficulty detecting thirst.
Make meals an occasion
It can be difficult for a person who lives alone or in a residential home to get excited about eating.
But if you work with the seniors to make regularly scheduled meals an event,
they are going to be more likely to want to eat.
Schedule regular mealtimes each day.
You can do a traditional three meal day or have five or six smaller mealtimes.
If the senior has stopped eating, get to the bottom of it and get any medical conditions under control.
Once you know why a senior has lost his or her appetite, you can work out how to get that person eating again.